And we don't have structured agenda for this.
Ugh. (laughs) But we only have a minute.
I'm here, I'll tell you from the outset- Well, it's very short.
(laughs) I know, sometimes As long as you guys share some questions, right?
Hard to be structured. I can see, I can see that. It's
60 point. What was that? It's 60 point. Yeah, no, I get that.
Hello, welcome. Please come in. Hello.
Hello. Well...
Thank you so much.
Okay,
good morning. Thank you so much for your time.
We have one hour with you and if you would like to open,
uh, with some, um, remarks and then we will have questions from members.
Thank you. T- thank you.
Yep. Tēnā koutou katoa. Uh, good morning everybody, thanks
for your time. I'm Jon Small, Chair of the Commerce
Commission. Uh, and with me here today are outgoing
Chief Executive, Adrian Meikle, our Grocery Commissioner,
Pierre van Heerden. Um, and also answering questions potentially
are our Telecommunications Commissioner Tristan Gilbertson,
uh, and Vanessa Horne who's our current...
she's our GM of, uh, Competition, Fair Trading and Credit.
We have some other senior staff around as well, uh,
in, in case, uh, questions,
um, that... and in case it's helpful.
I'll just make really a few brief remarks 'cause I do want to leave a lot of time
for questions. Um, so the
2024/'25 year was another strong one for the Commerce
Commission. Our performance, um, improvements
externally, um, are a reflection
of an ongoing program of internal changes that we've been
making over recent years, and those in-...
those internal changes include an increased risk appetite
and a greater use of our voice to effect change,
deliberately over-subscribing our litigation fund so that we're
now using it all, uh, and a more open
approach to listening and communicating with our stakeholders and with the general
public. The recent review of our governance and
effectiveness validated these strategic directions
and we are continuing to sharpen our internal operations along
these lines. So just a few performance
highlights. Uh, litigation has commenced
against Winston Wallboards in relation to rebates that we
say had an anti-competitive effect in the market for
plasterboard. This is, uh, one of
more, more than about 40 cases that we've currently got in our litigation
portfolio. Our first criminal
cartel prosecution was successfully completed in the r- year under
review, and we're currently prosecuting
Foodstuffs North Island in g-... uh, for engaging w- what
we say is
cartel conduct and breach of good faith
obligations under the Grocery Industry Competition Act and
the Supply Code. Uh, we secured
$16.9 million in consumer refunds, uh, from
Alpine Energy plus another one and a half million to address energy
hardships in that community. Our annual
report's got plenty more examples of our work across the
broad scope of the commission's activity.
Um, at a higher level though, I'd like to draw your attention to our
estimates of the public value of the commission's work
which totaled almost 2 billion in the year under
review, and that's a return of about $20 for each
dollar the commission spent. Uh, it's important to note that
these estimates are a first cut and we welcome feedback on the
methods that we've used. I note that they do not include
several clear forms of public value such as the work
to improve competition in banking and electricity, uh,
impacts from our grocery sector work, consumer education
through fair trading initiatives, business outreach to
guide and inform traders,
and the deterrents effect of our enforcement activities.
So in summary, uh, the commission is a high performing
organization that's poised to do even better in the future.
So we look forward to your questions.
Thank you so much. Are we good first to Irina Veli- Kia ora
koutou. Um...
Hello, Dr. Small. Welcome back. Um, before we begin, I just want
to acknowledge you, Adrian-
Hmm.
... um, for your eight years at the commission.
Um, you've led the Commerce Commission through a period of enormous change and
really want to acknowledge you and thank you for your service to consumers.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Um, I'm going to ask you some questions, uh, that are more
operational in nature. There were about 48,000 dollars spent on houseplants.
But first, can I ask you about, um, the annual report's
finding, that, uh, for every dollar that the Commerce Commission, um, has,
it delivers at least $20 in public b- benefit.
That's an incredible result. Um, why is the
government, uh, finding savings in the Commerce Commission's budget when you've
got that kind of result which consumers need right
now?
Uh, that's really a question for somebody else, I think.
But, uh, what I will say though is that this is, uh, th-this estimate,
um, is one that we've done for the last financial year and
was only released, um,
by, uh, in the middle of this year. So, uh, it's
the first time we've done this kind of exercise.
We thought it was really important to do because we're interested in it ourselves
and we're, we want, we want to use those results, particularly at a
sectoral level, to think about how to prioritize.
Um, and so, uh, but, but it is fresh information.
Um, I mean, obviously we'd hope that it would be,
um, uh,
taken for what it, what it is and its good return.
Um,
w- we think, we've also, um, if you don't mind me going on a little
longer, we've, uh, taken the opportunity to compare
that analysis with, um, uh, our, our colleagues in
Britain, the Competition and Markets Authority.
Um, and their, um, latest estimates are,
um, a bit higher, 24.5 to 1.
Um, but they do, they do use a different method.
Um, for example, anything that they can't quantify benefit
of, they also remove the costs.
Which is reasonable, but it's not what we did.
Mm-hmm.
So, for example, in, in, in the grocery sector, uh,
we, we booked nothing, we claimed nothing for the value of our work,
but all the costs are included. Um, so I, I think it's
a, um, you know, as, as I said, it's, it's useful I think for
transparency, something we wanted to do for ourselves internally, um, and,
and we welcome scrutiny of it.
Um, I guess the question is really about, you know, work on card
fees, particularly that's been sensitive and we've had a lot of feedback on that,
power bills, making that more transparent, grocery pricing, which continues to
be, um,
captivating for New Zealanders. Um, is that being resourced
appropriately in light of just how much difference it has made in the last
year when you're one of the agencies that has had to find savings and,
and 75% of your spend is on personnel, so that's in
jobs?
Yeah. Uh, I mean, there's a few things that we...
We've, we've got a, um, a, a long-term strategic finance
view of our budget now. We're taking a three-year view of it.
Um, and we are talking to the government and through
MBIE about ways of gaining further
flexibility within our a- appropriations, such as
collapsing elements of Crown-funded work so that we can
more easily prioritize across these areas and scale things up and down
accords of, according to, uh, where we perceive,
um, the need. So, we are looking for that kind of flexibility.
Um, I, you know, I do think that we, we could do more with more, of
course. Um,
and, uh, but these are, these are matters that are, you know, we submit on
them, but are kind of beyond our scope.
Um, the... Then asking
you, I guess, what are those things which have been, um, work streams which have
been collapsed, um, where there is a barrier to presenting to
consumers the, the work that needs to be able to happen in the New Zealand markets
that you would say are probably more medium term, long term and aren't something
that you're working on now? What are those?
Well, uh, I mean, I suppose it's, it's clear from our,
uh, our statements that market studies investment has been
scaled down. Um, we've also trimmed
our sales in the fuel regulation area.
So these are, these are... So,
these are things that we're pulling back on.
Um,
we believe that they have positive benefit that work.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but I mean, I, I, I think, um,
that generally, uh, we, you know, we have a, we have a sort
of, notwithstanding that we're under, uh,
financial, uh, pressure, we have a, um, a
save-to-invest element to what we're doing as
a, as a, as a commission. So we are, um,
attempting to reserve funds to invest in things that will make us more
productive, um, such as, um,
technology that allows us to, um, search
through vast amounts of information that we get when we conduct,
um, search warrants and cartel matters, that kind of
thing. So we're doing, I, I, I feel like we're doing as, as well as
we can. Um, we've got a constant eye to
our financial sustainability. Um,
and yeah.
I'll ask Populous.
Um,
we've certainly seen some people hurting from
high electricity prices.
Would you describe our electricity market
as, um, functional and competitive
when we've got, we know the four gentailers have 90%
of market share and we're seeing
de-industrialization, we're seeing people unable to pay their
power bills. How would you describe the market
and what do you intend to do?
Thanks for that question. I, I, I, I mean, I've, I've certainly made it
clear that I'm not satisfied about, um, the electricity
market, the gen- d- described generally.
Um, and we have been, um, uh, proactively working
with the Electricity Authority to, to coll- you know,
collectively, um, use our resources, uh, on,
on our side that, that's, that's kind of competition analysis
and, and industrial analysis. And on their side,
um, it's a code-making ability to regulate the market, the trade,
the-
Yeah.
... the trading part of the market.
Um, there's more to do there. Uh, I absolutely, um,
know and, and understand, um, and
empathize with people who are struggling to pay their power bills, whether that's
households or businesses. Um, that's a serious problem that we've got
to get on top of. So, I, the, I, but I suppose looking ahead, um,
so we're also assisting, uh, on, in, um, working closely with
MB on matters such as security of supply.
Um, it seems, it seems, I think, clear
that,
that tackling dry year climate risk
is, uh, super important for New Zealand.
We have to find a way through that. And I would also suggest
that doing that, um, is also key
to the affordability objective, um, because
it, that's what's, it's that risk that is built
into, uh, medium-term contract prices, which are flowing directly
through to the retail prices that we all pay.
So, we need to get rid of that. And if s- and if we can solve that
problem, we will also address affordability.
Several more. So, in terms of the dry year risk,
we've known about this for a long time.
It's no, no mystery to us. It happens periodically.
The market has consistently failed-
Mm-hmm.
... to deliver a response. So, do you think
the market is going to deliver a response to the dry year risk
or is there some other intervention we need?
I, I, I'd say I think that the market will not, by itself,
deliver a, a solution to dry year risk.
Um, I think that's one of the important insights that came from
the Frontier report, which we can, you know, we probably don't want to
get into that too much.
(laughs)
But I think they were, they were on the money when they made that observation.
I think it is clear that, that there's a, and, uh, and
we can talk about why, but that it is clear that there's a, a, a
market failure here, um, that, you know, cannot be solved by
the industry alone. And so, there is a role, uh, therefore for,
um, for government and regulators, and that's what we're
working on at the moment. So, I, I, you know, I think inevitably,
um, that is gonna be the, the direction of solution.
Um, doesn't mean that... So there's lots of different ways of doing that
though. Um, and it's a question of working through one that, and, and
finding one that, that works well and, and is
implementable.
Complementary. So, we have seen, in terms of the
electricity market, we've seen a, a continued
concentration of power-
(clears throat)
... market power in the four gen-tailors.
We've seen failure in the swallowing of s-
innovative retail over the past-
Yeah.
... few years. More than 50-plus have, have either fallen or been eaten up by
the-
Yep.
... by the gen-tailors. Do you think
this is, that the, the, the, the way in which
we
build a, a competitive market that's being managed by the Commerce Commission,
but as you also mentioned, the Electricity Authority, it's
also got the Gas Association and you could
argue, Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority.
So you've got four different parts trying to regulate
the system. And we have heard complaints from people in the sector
that ComCom kicks it over to the EA, the EA kicks it back,
nothing really happens. Do you think we have a system of
regulation that is m- managing to build
competitiveness in our electricity market and innovation in
our electricity market so that we can
fulfill our ambition-
Yeah.
... to electrify everything?
Um, I, I think, I, I think that
I would say yes. Um, uh, and I, but I, I
do think that there's a matter of,
um, um,
uh, having the, the, the, the sort of, uh, maybe the will
is part (laughs) is part of it. So, uh, let me just talk about a little bit about,
so y- your, your question about the competitiveness is really on point
for-
(clears throat)
... um, how the Commerce Commission is relevant
to this whole puzzle.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so, um, initially, so a couple of years ago, we got
complaints from independent retailers that they were being squeezed out of the
market.
Mm-hmm.
Um, we considered those complaints to be
entirely plausible and disturbing.
Um, and so then we looked at our options for what we, what do
we do about that. And, uh, and our, uh, and our,
our... The tool that we've got to deal with (laughs) that,
uh, is litigation under, it would be Section
27 or Section 36 of the Commerce Act.
And that litigation would be against four counterparties, um, and we'd be c-
we'd be saying that they, between them, had market power, collective market
power, and that they were using it to, um, to exclude,
um, independent retailers. Um, we
are, as I s- as I said in my opening comments, we are up
for, um, for...... taking some risk on
litigation. We're up for chancing our arm, but
that seemed to us to be a bridge too far,
particularly when the, there was an alternative available.
So, it's not that we shied away from litigation, it's that-
(coughs)
... we, we s- said to ourselves, "Look, this will take us three years and, and
millions of dollars." And at the end of that three years and millions of
dollars, we'll have a court that will say, "What happened three years
ago was either okay or not
okay." That's kind of, e- e- even in the best case
scenario, that's a poor victory because-
Yeah.
... you, you say, "Okay, no, that was bad.
You shouldn't have done that." So, so what?
So, what do we do now (laughs) , you know?
Um, we can't, probably these, these independents are dead by then.
Mm-hmm.
So, you know, that's, that did not seem to be an attractive route.
By contrast, we've got an electricity authority there with
regulation-making power, um, and we thought
that the best thing to do, and I think this is the right call, was to get in
beside them and we formed this electricity, uh,
energy, uh, competition task force.
Uh, and we are now working with them
and there's real progress being made. They're not...
It's not a case of throwing it to them and then running away.
It's a case of getting in beside them, working with them and,
and together, uh, crafting solutions which they have to implement because they're
the ones with the ability to do that. But we're there all the way.
All right.
Yeah.
Just to follow up on that. So, you're dead right.
What we have seen is the killing off of innovation in, in small,
small retail
products.
Yeah.
That, that has happened.
So, the question then comes back to are we suited?
If we want to electrify everything, are we suited with the Commerce Commission
doing one bit, passing it to the EA to set up a
competition
task force? Is that, is this the way we are going to
manage things? Do you think that we
are effective in, in the way manage this, this
problem, which is a longstanding problem?
Um, look, I think that really, you're ultimately,
you're, you're raising some policy questions here that,
um, uh, I, I don't, I don't
feel, you know, with my com-
Yeah. You don't have to respond to it.
... com- comm- capablE capable of, of dealing with.
But I, but I, you know, I will say that we're, we are, we are pushing as
hard as we possibly can with what we've got.
The, a- and I do think, you know, what I said about the dry air risk
is gonna come back to a policy question.
So, some of that is gonna be back into the policy domain.
We are working, uh, to assist that analysis.
But ultimately, these, these decisions are gonna fall to
politicians.
Okay. Well, thanks. We go to Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you, Chair. And, uh, just like to, um,
reinforce Arena's, uh, compliments to the Commission and the work you've done the
last year or two. Uh, just been fabulous.
Um, so thank you very much for that.
Just continuing on with, um, Honorable Willis's, um,
questioning line. Uh, without, um,
having to put you in a difficult situation, uh, you start off with the words market
failure, and, um, our party would agree that there is market failure
in, in the electricity sector. Um, but there's a number of
components, isn't there? So, we've got gentailers, we've got Transpower, we've got
individuals. Some are owned fully, some are owned partially-
Yeah.
... by the government. And there's a public good aspect to this.
New Zealand as a whole-
For sure.
... could do very, very well by, uh,
enabling better competition and for us to receive cheaper
prices both domestically and now in one of the
main reasons for me is productivity that can be gained from cheaper electricity
for our commercial sector. Um,
just quickly,
top energy in the far north is what you would call a
gentailer, yet it's a consumer trust.
It produces 125% of the energy needs for Northland.
Yeah.
And they're investing their bonus, or their surplus at the moment, in
infrastructure and lines-
Yeah.
... so that they can service other regions.
So, there's a number of components in there to try and get the competitiveness that
you're talking about.
Yeah.
And there is this kind of view that we need to split the
gentailers, you know, separate generation
from retail. That's one view. There is
another view that, um, the government can be flexing harder
on the transmission
because we own Transpower, and to back that up with strong
regulation. And then the market will find its
own level within those two, um, pieces.
Without, you know, committing you to statements that you can't make on
behalf of government, going back to your, there is a market
failure here, can you point to those bits, those components where you think
the greatest market failure is for us?
Um, thanks. That's, there's, there's, yes.
So, look, just on the top energy point, and you, you know, you made the
observation that, um, that in the top energy area, which, uh, we all
know as Northland, um, there is, um,
there's a lot of generation, particularly solar, uh, and
more than is required in the district.
And there has been some trouble getting that to market.
Um, because, and it, and it's to do with the way that the
wires, the wires network broadly defined is configured
and, between low voltage-
(coughs)
... networks that are controlled by top, top energy and high voltage networks that
are controlled by Transpower.
Yeah.
And so, this is a, um, this is, I think, the
first example of something that's gonna come up more
in this country. And so the solution, this kind
of the, so the, which goes under the name of Ene- Energy
Bridge-Um, as I understand, it
involves, um, changing the status of that line
so that it, uh, so that it's treated b- by regulators as a
transmission asset rather than a distribution asset.
Yeah.
And that seemed, to me, like on the face of it, uh, uh, it seems
like a good idea and it, and it kind of, it- it's gonna address that issue, and
hopefully there and in other areas.
Um, um, you mentioned, um, splitting the gentailers.
I, I, I th- my take on it,
personally, is that there's a lot that can be done
by regulation that, that will break down the
barriers, um, to, uh, independent
investment in retailing, but also in generation, which is-
Yes.
... you know, that's the bit that we really need when you think about it.
I mean, I, I agree with you. This should be a, um, a real strength for this
country. We should, we should have a flood of, of this stuff and
we can do it, and we just need to, uh, uh, unblock it.
Um, and so f- from my perspective, all that
stuff, there's, there's all these, um,
frequently new, not the major players, frequently new investors
wanting to build this, this, um, capacity.
We need to enable that and some of that requires, um, the sort
of work that we're doing through the taskforce, which is, um,
helping to get, um, firming contracts for those
suppliers. Um, some of it's to do with the
wires network as we've just talked about with, um, Top Energy.
Um, the main thing is that we're going at all of these pieces a-
uh, at once, um, and then talking, I think,
communicating, engaging with the people who want to spend the money.
Can I, um, summarize that as that what you- your answer to
achieving or addressing market failure is a
systemic approach? It's-
Definitely.
... right across all of those efforts.
Definitely. Yes.
Yeah.
Okay.
Multifaceted. Yeah.
Uh, so a new question from Scott Willis.
We're good for now.
Are you good for now?
Yeah.
Oh. Uh, so D- Dr. Vanessa Wenning.
Uh, thank you. I'd like to, um, switch a bit of attention to the organization of
CommComm itself. So you've undergone, um, sort of a
major review-
Mm-hmm.
... um, in that, um, in the last period and, uh, so that
included sort of both governance and organizational issues, and as a
result, I understand and some new ways of working and just-
Right.
... uh, uh, wonder if you could tell us a bit more about that review and what you
expect some of the, um, changes to be and the impacts of those ways of
working?
Do you want? Yeah, do you want-
I'll pick that one up, sure.
Yeah, yeah. Sure.
Thanks for the question, yeah. So in September last
year, the government, um, commissioned a
independent governance and effectiveness review.
It was undertaken by, um, Dame Paula Rebstock who was
a previous chair of the Commerce Commission, Dr.
Alan Fels who'd been a chair of the ACCC in
Australia, and also, um, David Hunt.
Um, we worked through that, uh, process with the
independent reviewers and were able to, um, contribute
to, to that process. There were, um, there were 32
recommendations that came out of it and all of the ones that w-
we're within our purview to make changes, um, we
agreed with and many of them we had already started.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so i- at around the same time the review, uh, came
out publicly, uh, we were able to announce to people our
New Ways of Working program.
Mm-hmm.
So look, that's very much focused on the outcomes that
the review was looking for, so, uh, greater
effectiveness and efficiency, enhanced
delegation to our staff, a, uh,
reduction in, um, the number of committees
or what we used to call divisions to committees from, um,
11 to 7. So all focused in on
enhancing, um, how we operate in order to get the
best, um, outcomes for New Zealanders.
Uh, we've got a assessment point coming in February, so we've been
iterating, um, since 1 October and a fuller
assessment in February, and then we'll look to really bed
in, uh, what the, um, the key changes need to
be. As well as that reduction in committee numbers, one of
the critical things has been a swap to a committee structure under the Crown
Entities Act rather than a division, uh, decision-making
structure under the Commerce Act.
What that allows is an outside-in perspective, so we've been able to,
um, have independent members on those committees and also have
some of our staff. So it's all
about, um, effectiveness and efficiency but also a
greater one commission approach, prioritization
right across the commission, but we welcomed the review
and, um, and the challenges it put to us as, as well as the
suggestions and, um, as I said, we've, we've implemented
everything that's in there that's been within our gift to do so.
And, um, what are the, uh, impact, uh, measures that you're
going to use to assess the effectiveness of this review?
Yes. Yeah, so we've just, um, set down some evaluation
criteria that's just been approved by our board.
I can, um, provide them to the committee.
I haven't got them here, but, um,
assessments qualitative and quantitative in terms of pace,
engagement with the people who are operating with us, uh,
feedback and, um, yeah, ensuring that we're setting out to
deliver in those key areas
cross-organizational prioritization when commission approach greater
effectiveness and efficiency. And outside of our
decision-making, we've also made changes around how we engage
with our stakeholders. John's mentioned that, and sort of our
posture there, so making sure that, um, we're really hearing,
um, people out and, um, about what their views and perspectives are,
so we'll be looking at that as well.... signs on that are good.
We've just had a heads-up on our, um, engagement, oh s-
not engagement survey, sorry, stakeholder survey, that we've seen
quite a significant, um, rise in the way people are
seeing us and the work we're doing.
So, about a 9%, uh, increase in the SPE in
terms of, um, the engagement that people were seeing from us, so-
Wow. Hmm.
... um, we're looking forward to that final report as part of the ways of
measuring the success.
Just a sup on-
Yeah, just a quick sup from me on this one.
Hmm.
In this one, can you tell us a bit about the cost and any fiscal savings with the
structural reform?
From, um, New Ways of Working?
Yeah.
Yeah, so New Ways of Working hasn't been a structural
reform per se, it's been a change to the way we undertake
our decision-making and our operating model.
We used, uh, internal staff to support the changes
and, uh, the decision-making and drive those changes
through the organization. There's been, um, some small
costs associated with it, but it hasn't been,
um, an exercise in, you know,
significant cost and expenditure.
Um, yeah, so we- we've taken it ourselves and delivered on
it.
So, any savings? Is that a cost-
So, savings, slightly different, um, situation.
So there may well be savings that are realized through our New Ways of
Working. Um, we've undertaken savings over
the last couple of years, um, as required.
Um, there will be an opportunity-
(coughs)
... for us to, uh, realize some broader savings as a consequence of New Ways of
Working, and that'll be looking at things like the amount of
time and effort put on, in by our commissioners and how that's
reflected as well as, um, the amount of resource
that we have committed to particular areas.
So, we're focused, um, on savings, but we're
also, as John's mentioned, we've got a really clear
understanding of our three-year strategic fiscal outlook,
and, um, we- we're working to make sure, um, we
save to remain within that envelope as cost
increases and baselines remain relatively flat.
Good. Thank you. Um, sup- uh, Rachel.
Yeah, just a quick supplementary on that.
The commission didn't meet seven of its non-financial performance targets-
Yeah.
... including, um, key measures in grocery, fuel, retail payment
systems, and- and the airport regulation services.
Um, is anything in the governance changes aimed
to improve performance around those targets that weren't met, or is it
simply because 6% of employees have lost their jobs
and staff numbers in this year fell from 447 to
420?
Yeah. So, um,
you're right, there's seven different ones in there.
A number of them are more, um, technical in terms of the timing.
So, some of them relate to the time and nature and number of
reports. We do have periodic reports in areas
like airports. Um, what we have seen, um, is in
our mergers area, there's been some timeliness, um, areas where we haven't
met, and we're really focused in on that.
John can, um, talk a little bit more about that.
Um,
I wouldn't, um, draw that correlation between the reduction in the
staff that we've seen and the not- non-meeting of, um, the
SPEs. We- we work really hard to deliver in all
areas, um, with the resources that- that
we have available to us. John, do you wanna talk a bit about the merger-
I'll- I'll just pick up-
Yeah.
... but slightly more generally actually, that the, um, we've been quite
dissatisfied with, uh-
(coughs) ... SPE measures for some time.
Okay.
Um, we- we'd, you know, we don't, we don't really like
the- the- the way that they're
framed. So, the number of reports, for example, is a
fairly crude measure-
Yeah.
... of effectiveness and impact. Um, and so we're
currently, um, and just at the last board meeting,
uh, working on, um, a new statement of intent,
uh, which will, we're hoping to come in early rather than wait for the old one
to go right through its five years.
Uh, and linked to that will be then SPEs that
have got sharp, much sharper, we hope, um, uh,
measures of, uh, impact and- and- and effectiveness.
Um, so, uh, a- and but so that's- that's one
point. Uh, but- but it is true that some of these, in some of these
areas, um, where the flow of work is such that, you know,
you have a whole lot of work in-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, in, uh, particularly in the infrastructure space, there's a whole lot
happening, um, in- in one year because you've got to set price paths and you've
got to do-
Mm-hmm.
... um, you know, input methodology reviews and stuff.
So that's a lot of reports, but then the next year-
(laughs)
... there's not so many reports (laughs)
- Yeah. ... and so it looked, it's- it's, so there's some, uh, it's one of the
artifacts of-
Yeah.
... um, the- the fairly crude measures of- of
output in those SPEs.
Yes. Yes, uh-
Can I ask a primary?
Primary, yep.
Thank you. Um, Dr. Small, I have some questions about the board's oversight of
operational spend given the constraints on your spending-
Yeah.
... uh, in this financial year. Flagged for you that I was going to ask about the
$48,000 spent on hiring plants. So,
um, I want to know whether the board, um,
approved, um,
$48,068
worth of hiring plants. Given there's no line item for plants,
um, I've had to draw, um, some information from the
WPQs, um, that a- that have been asked around
this. Um, firstly, I want to know what appropriation and output
classes was that $48,000 from, um,
given that the only spending that I can see has changed is in the appropriations
that were meant to fund enforcement and regulatory activity.
Is that kind of operational spend coming from what should be outward-focused spend?
No. No, it's not. Um, but, uh, but as to the, um,
the specifics of that expenditure,
um-I'm, um, I, I don't have those
details to hand. I'm not sure-
Yeah.
... how
to answer for anything on that. I mean, I can give you a little bit of, um-
That's okay, you can provide that information later on-
We can.
... but thank you for answering yeah, if you don't have it.
... at a high level.
I mean all agencies have overhead costs whether it be leasing,
associated with their environment, or people who are delivering services
to support the, um, the center. We'll certainly, um, take
a look at that number. We, um,
we take value for money and the public purse pretty
seriously. I can, um, assure the member that, um, our
offices, we don't have a atrium full of beautiful
plants where, um, we're talking about, um-
(laughs) $28,000 would suggest that might be what would be value for money.
(laughs)
Well, I, I think that would be a replacement and ongoing, um, watering and support
costs, but, um, we are up on a building up on the terrace and a
building in Auckland where, um, we're very careful with the expenditure
that we have, and I think that represents, um, a sig-
significant sum but also an important part of enabling a space where
people can work because, um, we don't have the,
have a really kind of flash office with all the, um, ins and
outs of, um, air conditioning. But we'll, we'll get you the, the
breakdown on it.
Yep. Okay. I have a few sups on this.
Um,
I want to know, um, that spend, when I
compared it to similarly sized agencies, seem to be sort of between
six and 10 times as much for-
Okay.
... sort of similar, um, operational line items.
Um, can I ask you about your procurement process for something like that?
Mm-hmm.
Um, what w- and what y- you would've expected to raise with the board, um, over
something that might've been surprising-
Mm-hmm.
... um, to, to them when they are in a period where they're losing
jobs and they are constrained from doing other activities?
Mm-hmm. Well, I, I, as I said, I will have a, have a good look
at the process. In terms of the way we undertake our
procurement, we have a, a, a pretty, um,
traditional procurement process where we undertake, um, the
opportunity to see who's able to provide what we're looking for and assess
that. I will, um, take on board the member's note
around the comparison to other agencies that may, um,
may be about floor space. We are, um, spread across four
floors here in Wellington in a reasonably narrow building and, um,
two in Auckland, so I'd, um, think I can provide some more
helpful insights to put that in perspective for the minist- uh, the member.
But absolutely if, um, if we've got a disproportionate
expenditure there, we can, um, take a look and revisit our
procurement on that for the future.
Just a couple of sups. It's the same subject I think.
I- it's, um-
It's, it's on spend but it's not, not on
plants. Okay. All right.
Sure.
You can tell I've been in the depths of your...
(laughs)
(laughs) Um...
Um, so just one about capital reserves.
Um, the reserves seem to have risen from 18.45
million, um,
to, to 18.45 million-
Yeah.
... from 15 million.
Um, why, why are those reserves increasing also in this constrained
environment?
Yeah. So, it's a good question. Um, and it's
a kind of finance answer, so bear, um, bear with me.
So, um, the commission does undertake this use of
reserves. We, unlike government departments, we don't
have memorandum accounts, so this is our way to ensure that we're
able to, um, meet future costs,
um, in areas where fees might be collected and those
things, capital expenditure and investment.
Um, we have returned, uh, reserves in the past and did so
in the 2024, um, budget
round. The increase there directly reflects, um,
two specific things. One was, um, our save to invest
strategy
that John has, um, spoken about already.
And also, some additional money which was carried
through to the next year relating to our water
activity. So there's quite specific, um, pieces of work in
there. We, we use, um, one of the critical uses of
the reserves is to underwrite our litigation
portfolio and, um, John talked about how we've
really, um, overextended that, and what we have in
place is the ability to utilize an additional $3 million
towards litigation over the next three years.
So, um, yeah, e- every dollar in there is accounted
for.
Yeah, and just on the litigation, um,
this has really been a, um, a, a bit of an issue at the commission for,
for a little while, um, and, um, in the last
couple of years, we've, uh, as a board,
uh, agreed to
over-budget. So we have six and a half million dollars each year for
litigation, but if that's all we budget for, then
we'll never spend it because cases drag out-
Yeah.
... and get shifted and
settle and so we have to budget prudently
for the costs that may occur. Um,
but experience tells us that, that often they
don't. And so, um, the board is essentially, um,
oversubscribing that fund by about 50%.
Um, and so, that's, that, that's how we're, um, that's how we've
increased our litigation activity, um, is, is, is
through that, that method, um, and then the, the reserves are the thing that
back it. We've suggested some other ways of handling
that litigation fund, um, to MBIE and we're hopeful that might
get more flexibility.
Just a question on the litigation. So I, I have a sup from Dr.
Hamish-
Yeah, it's also, it's also on litigation so it might, might fit in.
Um, there's been recent increases in, uh, fines
for, um, breaches of the Fair Trading Act.
Yes.
Has it changed your risk towards, um, taking cases
on, uh, given that the outcomes now may be great?
... n- no, it hasn't really changed our risk appetite, I don't think.
It, what it does is it makes us more effective.
Mm-hmm.
Um, uh, but, you know, that money goes to the Crown, um-
... it doesn't, doesn't come to us and-
Yeah, b- b- but the thing is, uh, the tra- uh, the, the trade-off
of, of choosing.
Mm-hmm.
It's the choice matrix of whether you're going to pay something.
Yeah. So, look, I think, um, the, we've,
we've got, um, we've got enforcement priorities that we're transparent
about-
Mm-hmm.
... every year. Mm-hmm.
And we've got enforcement criteria that tell us how to
manage cases with-
Mm-hmm. ... you know, in, in, in other words, we don't...
Not all cases, um, resolve through litigation.
Some are, some are settled other ways because they're less serious.
So, we're constantly sort of, um, managing that whole
portfolio through our enforcement committee right across the commission,
competition, fair trade and credit, infra- uh, breaches and infrastructure,
everything. And, and trying to get the best bang
for the buck from that six and a half million every year.
Um, the fact that the fines are going up in fair trading is
really great. You know, we, we are, we're very, very pleased
about that. They, they need, they really need it too.
Um, but I don't think really that it's gonna make a lot of
difference to... I mean, it'll make us more effective (laughs) in those areas,
but, um, we still need to allocate carefully a-
ac- across the various aspects of the commission's work.
Mm-hmm. All right. Going back to you, Andrea.
Um, love the work on litigation. Um, you
can hear my concerns around your personnel though.
The, um, you know, we've, you, you've lost some
people, and in the same period, spending on consultants, which seems to me to
be legal consultants, has increased, um, from
4.51 million to 7.22 million, which I assume is associated with the l-
with heavier litigation. Um, but that's a 60%
rise. Are you letting your expert competition lawyers
go and then hiring them back as consultants?
No.
We're, no, we're definitely not doing that.
Um, I can assure you of that. Uh, well, look, the, the, one of the
interesting things, and Adrian might want to comment on this as well.
But o- one of the things that we've found, um,
as our risk appetite has increased is that
we need different things from our lawyers.
Uh, we, we, we don't need our lawyers to tell us no.
Uh, it's not their business to tell us no.
Um, it's their business to advise us on what the risks are.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, and so that's a different, that's a different
function. And pe- some people who are,
can adjust more easily to that than others. Um, so...
And, and, and also, there's, you know, there's things...
It's important to make sure that lawyers are focused on the things that
only lawyers can do, um, so that doesn't have to be
that, that-
Says the economist. (laughs)
Yeah, that's right.
(laughs)
And, and the same for economists, you know?
And the same for commissioners. So, it's-
So, uh, I mean, we can pick up on the, um, numbers a little bit.
So just to be clear, there's two different, um, sources of funding.
So, we do have what's called an external litigation budget, which is
exactly what it says on the tin. It's about external lawyers who work
with us to take the litigation through the courts.
That may be sit- where you're seeing potentially the increase.
In terms of our contractor and consultancy
spend, um, which does include, um,
lawyers, um, we're at about 6.6% of our
staff cost, which is very low.
Okay.
Um, and we manage it hard and well. We're very conscious
that, um, we want people and we want the best people, and so we manage
that down. So again, I can get the member more information, but the
relativity between the litigation, external
major LIP funding, how we report on contractors and consultants
in our overall consulting budget, which also includes
engineering experts and other, um, people who work on
matters like our import methodologies.
Um, so there's a... It's not as clear as it could be
with the three buckets, so we can certainly set that out for you.
Please, Madam Chair, could I ask some questions to Pier?
Yep.
Which are different?
Um, so, all right. There is, uh, I think no supplementary on that...
Yep, all right. We'll start with ******.
Thank you. Um, Commissioner, congratulations on a big year for you.
Um, can I, uh, ask you about,
um, the market dynamics that are changing around the government's different
priorities in the area? Um, we've seen some, um,
you know, s- I w- I would say stronger political messaging around,
um, action on groceries. How has that changed your
approach, particularly around the, um, considerations that you will have done in
this year for the merger? Um, and on things like use
of, um, AI tools in stores, um,
and, um, you know, different uses of, say, algorithmic
pricing by the two majors, um, in the market?
Yeah.
Thank- thanks for that question. And yes, there's a lot happening in the
grocery sector at the moment and as I've said
right from the start when I was appointed, there's no one silver bullet.
Fine.
And what we're seeing now is all of these different aspects
starting to work together. So, we've got the Fair Trading Act that
we use internally in terms of our tools, the Commerce Act,
GECA, but then the government has also taken a look at our market
study from 2022, things like overseas investment,
resource management, and all of those are being worked through.
But also, just the, the overall political tone
has changed. So, what we are doing from our side is
ensuring that we continue putting sufficient pressure
on these major supermarkets to achieve the
change. Because at the end of the day, as we all
know, structural change is necessary in the
industry to achieve the biggest change.
... for consumers. That doesn't happen quickly.
Mm-hmm.
So we've been focusing on the supply code, ensuring
that, uh, has sufficient input, um,
and adds sufficient focus. We've got a new supply code that's come
out. We've got the wholesale inquiry.
And with the wholesale inquiry, there are certain backstops in there that many
people don't realize can be triggered, things like
non-discriminatory pricing where
any of these major supermarkets, if that is
activated, have to supply a competitor at
the same price as their own stores.
Mm.
Now, that is a significant lever that is in there.
So we're looking at all of those together with where the
government's policy is going, and of course, the government's
policy is a different aspect to it as well.
But at the end of the day, I, I can see in Auckland as an example that there
has been some movement, which is really good, um, you know,
with Costco and a lot of the smaller competitors coming
up. The concentration of the two majors has
decreased, and that's what we want to see across the country because at
the moment in Auckland, it sits at about 71%.
The rest of the country is round about at 88%.
So there's a, there's a big gap. Um, and all of these
things work together, and we, we just want to make sure we keep our
foot to the pedal-
Mm.
... and have sufficient focus on it so that the
supermarkets do make
changes.
Um, I'll come back... Well, can I ask about,
um, uh, the situation for smaller suppliers
with, um, the two, um, major buyers?
Um, they are saying, you know, in a year where, say, in the
cheese market in New Zealand, manufacturers two have gone to the wall,
one is in danger, um, they are saying that unfair,
um, and, and collusionary pricing practices are pricing them out
of not only shelf space but, um, the ability to sell to
consumers at a price that they would be competitive at.
Um, there is no other arm of government other than you that
can help, um, suppliers. There is for consumers.
Is that a focus for you? Um, what are you going to do to make sure that the law is
keeping up with these new practices, and why, why-
Mm-hmm.
... did, why is there no guidance currently for businesses on using AI in that
way?
Well, there, there's absolutely a massive focus from us, and for the
year ahead as well, on suppliers and ensuring that they're treated
fairly. That's why we reviewed the supply code and we've
issued a new grocery supply code, which
includes, uh, different aspects like investment buying,
making sure that can't happen anymore, but also retaliatory
conduct-
Mm.
... that that is outlawed as well. So as we go through, we
do have a anonymous reporting tool
where suppliers are often very nervous to come forward.
However, I must say that over the last 12 months,
I've seen more and more of them come directly to myself and my team
and be willing to talk about things-
Yeah.
... because at the end of the day, we need to be able to know what is going
on in order to take action under any of our tools that
we have. But assisting and ensuring that there's a strong,
robust supplier community is absolutely essential
to our grocery market.
Can, can, can I add something to that if you wouldn't mind, which is that, um, you
know, the, the, the squeezing out of, uh, small
suppliers, this is, this is another reason why, you know,
this was, uh, this was a contributing factor to us declining the
Foodstuffs Merger.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yep.
You know? You need... Uh, more competition in retail
will lead to more choice for consumers
and more business opportunities for suppliers.
So it all fits together and that's why more
retail competition is so important.
Mm-hmm. That's, that's right. And if that were working, two
of the eight New Zealand cheese manufacturers that supply at that medium size level
to the two major buyers wouldn't have gone to the wall this year.
Uh, is it working? Are we doing enough?
I, I believe we are doing enough. Um, you know, there will always be
various reasons why some companies don't make it.
If it's specifically because they've been pushed out of a, a major
supermarket, we'd certainly like to take a look, very, uh,
closer look at that and see what were the circumstances
around that because, um, you know, we don't want any
supplier to be impacted unfairly with the
major retailers or supermarkets.
Okay. Um, quick, uh, primary from Dr.
David Wilson
before we finish. Or is it covered?
Um, just a warning-
Is it covered?
It's fine. It's a primary one. I'm switching to the banking sector, so if anyone
else wants to carry on on (laughs)
- So we are about to finish very soon, so yes-
Yes.
Okay. ... if you could ask your question.
Okay (inaudible)
Thank you. Um, really pleased to hear you talking about, uh, both qual
and quant, um, evaluations for yourselves going forward,
um, especially when you're trying to analyze impact.
And I, I'm on the FEC committee as well, so it was part of the banking
inquiry and-
Oh, yeah.
... um, in terms of impact, I could say that you're reporting
huge impact over that banking inquiry.
Um, I don't know how you measure that.
(laughs)
Um,
and where I'm going to is that, um,
we still have an oligopoly that is
underinvested in software and services for consumers
among other things.
Given the report you did and the inquiry that's being
produced, um, do you still see that there are
areas for improvement in the banking sector that we could push for?
And I know there are things on stream now like, uh, open banking and
hopefully sometime soon we're gonna have real-time processing and account to
account. I'm not sure when that's gonna happen.
Yeah.
Um...
So can I just, uh, just
say- But yeah, it's all about com- competition.
Yeah, so can I just say that this is the annual performance
review, and also we can question about the current, uh, uh,
operations and strategic direction rather than speculating and
asking, uh, for their, uh, opinions on things going forward.
So if you want to rephrase your question, that would be better.
Mm.
Yeah, so th- that's an impact question really.
Yeah, so you want to assess, so can you ask the question again?
Okay. So, do you believe that there's been sufficient impact from those two
reports to address the market inefficiencies?
Uh, I, look, I think, uh, open banking's a good, a good, a
good thing. It's great that it's there.
Um, there are, there are other aspects of
that whole ecosystem that could be improved.
Um, confirmation of payee is there as well, but it's not there for everybody.
That's a concern for us. Um, and the competition
matter. Um, and, um,
yeah, so there's a, there's a, there's a, there's a number of things that we still
have our eye on in that area, uh, and I include
payments in there alongside banking.
Um, we've got some formal authority in case of payments that we're
using, uh, but we're, we're maintaining, um,
what pressure we can in, in the banking sector as well.
All right, good. All good. Looks like that's all.
There might be some follow-up questions. (laughs) Thank you so much.
Thank you to you, Adrian, as well. Thank you, um, for, uh, your work
in, in Commerce Commission. And, uh, Dr.
Small, to you and your entire team and of course to you as well.
Um, happy Christmas and happy holidays and we'll see you again sometime very soon.
Thank you very much
indeed.
Thank you.
(microphone interference drowns out speaker)
All right.
Yep.
Is that
all? Um, sir, we're moving to private session now.
That's all my time.